Red heifer

The red heifer (Hebrew: הָּמֻ דֲ א הָרָּפ,
romanized: parah adumah), a heifer which is never
pregnant, milked, or yoked, also known as the red
cow, is a heifer sacrificed by the priests as a sacrifice to
God in the Book of Numbers (Torah, Old Testament).
Its ashes after being sacrificed and burned were used
for the ritual purification of corpse uncleanness caused
by an Israelite coming into contact with a human
corpse, a human bone, or a human grave.

Hebrew Bible

The red heifer offering instructions are described in
Numbers 19. The Israelites were commanded to obtain
"a red heifer without spots, wherein is no blemish, and
upon which never came a yoke". The heifer is then
slaughtered and burned outside of the camp. Cedar
wood, an herb called ezov, and wool dyed scarlet are added to the fire, and the remaining ashes are placed
in a vessel containing pure spring water.
To purify a person, water from the vessel is sprinkled on them using a bunch of ezov, on the third and
seventh day of the purification process. The Kohen who performs the ritual then becomes ritually impure
and must then wash himself and his clothes in spring waters. He remains impure until the evening of the
day he sprinkled the water of lustration.

Mishnah

The Mishnah, the central compilation of the Oral Torah in Rabbinic Judaism, the oral component of the
Written Torah, contains a tractate on the red heifer, which is the tractate Parah ("cow") in Seder Tohorot,
which explains the procedures involved. The tractate has no existing Gemara, although commentary on the
procedure appears in the Gemara for other tractates of the Talmud.

Details of the commandment

According to Mishnah's tractate Parah, the presence of two black hairs invalidates a red heifer, in addition to
the usual requirements of an unblemished animal for sacrifice. There are various other requirements, such as
natural birth (The caesarian section renders a heifer candidate invalid). The water must be "living" (ie.,
spring water). This is a stronger requirement than for a mikveh or ritual bath; rainwater accumulated in a
cistern is permitted for a mikveh but cannot be used in the red heifer ceremony.
The Mishnah reports that in the days of the Temple in Jerusalem, water for the ritual came from the Pool of
Siloam. The ceremony involved was complex and detailed. To ensure the complete ritual purity of those
involved, care was taken to ensure that no one involved in the red heifer ceremony could have had any
contact with the dead or any form of tumah, and implements were made of materials such as stone, which in
Jewish law do not act as carriers for ritual impurities. The Mishnah recounts that children were used to draw
and carry the water for the ceremony, children born and reared in isolation for the specific purpose of
ensuring that they never came into contact with a corpse:
There were courtyards in Jerusalem built over [the virgin] rock and below them a hollow [was
made] lest there might be a grave in the depths, and pregnant women were brought and bore their
children there, and there they reared them. And oxen were brought, and on their backs were laid
doors on top of which sat the children with cups of stone in their hands. When they arrived in
Shiloah [the children] alighted, and filled [the cups with water], and mounted, and again sat on
the doors.
— Mishna Parah 3:2
Various other devices were used, including a causeway from the Temple Mount to the Mount of Olives so
that the heifer and accompanying priests would not come into contact with a grave.
According to the Mishnah, the ceremony of the burning of the red heifer took place on the Mount of Olives.
A ritually pure kohen slaughtered the heifer and sprinkled its blood in the direction of the Temple seven
times. The red heifer was then burned on a pyre, together with scarlet dyed wool, hyssop, and cedarwood.
In recent years, the site of the burning of the red heifer on the Mount of Olives has been tentatively located
by archaeologist Yonatan Adler.

Color

The heifer's color is described in the Torah as adumah (אדומה), which is "red". However, Saadia Gaon
translates this word as Judeo-Arabic: اﺮﻔﺻ, romanized:
ṣafrā, a word translated to English as "yellow". In
addition, the Quran describes Moses being commanded about a "yellow" cow (al-Baqara 2:69).
To explain this discrepancy, Yosef Qafih in his Hebrew translation and commentary on Saadia's work
argues that the Bible requires the cow to have a ruddy light-brown color, which he says is the normal color
of a cow. He says this color is in general described as אדום in Hebrew and "yellow" in Arabic, resolving
the discrepancy in the color words. He explains the Biblical requirement to mean that the cow be entirely of
this color, and not have blotches or blemishes of a different color.

Jewish tradition

A red heifer that conforms with all of the requirements imposed by halakha is practically a biological
anomaly. For example, the animal must be entirely of one color (a series of tests listed by the sages must be
performed to ensure this) and the hair of the cow must be absolutely straight (to ensure that the cow had not
previously been yoked, as this would be a disqualifier). According to Jewish tradition, only nine red heifers
were actually slaughtered in the period extending from Moses to the destruction of the Second Temple.
Mishnah's tractate Parah recounts them, stating that Moses prepared the first, Ezra the second, Simeon the
Just and Johanan the High Priest prepared two each, and Elioenai ben HaQayaph, Ananelus, and Ishmael
ben Fabus prepared one each.
The extreme rarity of the animal, combined with the detailed ritual in which it is used, have given the red
heifer special status in Jewish tradition. It is cited as the paradigm of a
ḥoq, a biblical law for which there is
no apparent logic. Because the state of ritual purity obtained through the ashes of a red heifer is a necessary
prerequisite for participating in Temple service, efforts have been made in modern times by Jews wishing
for biblical ritual purity (see tumah and taharah) and in anticipation of the building of the Third Temple to
locate a red heifer and recreate the ritual. However, multiple candidates have been disqualified and multiple
candidates were found at the same time also.
Also, all red heifer ashes were still in use as late as the time of Jeremiah (III) in the fourth century CE and
then were exhausted completely.

Quran

The second and the longest surah (chapter) in the Quran is named "al-Baqara" (Arabic: ةﺮﻘﺒﻟا "the heifer")
after the heifer as the commandment is related in the surah.
Surah Al Baqarah Ayah 67-71 (https://quran.com/al-baqarah/67-71)
Remember when Moses said to his people, “Allah commands you to sacrifice a heifer.” They
replied, “Are you mocking us?” Moses responded, “I seek refuge in Allah from acting foolishly!”
They said, “Call upon Allah to clarify for us what type of heifer it should be!” He replied, “Allah
says, ‘The heifer should neither be old nor young but in between. So do as you are
commanded!’” They said, “Call upon Allah to specify for us its color.” He replied, “Allah says,
‘It should be a bright yellow heifer—pleasant to see.’” Again they said, “Call upon Allah so that
he may make clear to us which cow, for all cows look the same to us. Then, Allah willing, we
will be guided to the correct one.”
He replied, “Allah says, ‘It should have been used neither to till the soil nor water the fields;
wholesome and without blemish.’” They said, “Now you have come with the truth.” Yet they still
slaughtered it hesitantly!
— Quran (translation by Dr. Mustafa Khattab), Surah 2 (Al-Baqarah), ayat 67–71]]

Ibn Kathir explains that according to ibn Abbas and Ubayda ibn al-Harith, it displayed the stubbornness of
the Children of Israel, who asked unnecessary questions to the prophets without readily following any
commandment from God; had they slaughtered a cow, any cow, it would have been sufficient for them - but
instead, as they made the matter more difficult, God made it even more difficult for them.

Christian

The non-canonical Epistle of Barnabas (8:1) explicitly equates the red heifer with Jesus. In the New
Testament, the phrases "without the gate" (Hebrews 13:12) and "without the camp" (Numbers 19:3 (https://
mechon-mamre.org/p/pt/pt0419.htm#3), Hebrews 13:13) have been taken to be not only an identification of
Jesus with the red heifer, but an indication as to the location of the crucifixion.

Modern day

The Temple Institute, an organization dedicated to preparing the reconstruction of a Third Temple in
Jerusalem, has been attempting to identify red heifer candidates consistent with the requirements of
Numbers 19:1–22 and Mishnah Tractate Parah. In recent years, the institute thought to have
identified two candidates, one in 1997 and another in 2002. The Temple Institute had initially declared
both kosher but later found each to be unsuitable. The institute has been raising funds in order to use
modern technology to produce a red heifer that is genetically based on the Red Angus. In September
2018, the institute announced a red heifer candidate was born saying "the heifer is currently a viable
candidate and will be examined [to see] whether it possess[es] the necessary qualifications for the red
heifer."In September 2022, five red cows were imported from the United States and transferred to a
breeding farm in a West Bank settlement. Rabbis consider the cows kosher for sacrifice.

